This wiki is intended for users of the Gambit Scheme system.  It is a
place where various resources are collected and where users can
exchange information related to Gambit. The information found here may
be incomplete, outdated, or incorrect. The old wiki site, which is now
deprecated and read-only, can be found
[here](http://gambitscheme.org/wiki/index.php/Main_Page).  Some links
in the new wiki still point to the old one. Feel free to update things
and contribute new material.

### What's Gambit?

Gambit consists of two main programs: `gsi`, the Gambit Scheme
interpreter, and `gsc`, the Gambit Scheme compiler.  The interpreter
contains the complete execution and debugging environment. The
compiler is the interpreter extended with the capability of generating
executable files. The compiler can produce standalone executables or
compiled modules which can be loaded at run time.  Interpreted code
and compiled code can be freely mixed.

Currently the compiler supports generating C or JavaScript code. The
name Gambit-C refers to the version of the system that generates C
code, which is more mature, more featurefull, and faster than
Gambit-JS, the version of the system that generates JavaScript code.
The main features of Gambit-C are:

* `Conformance.` The Gambit-C system conforms to the R4RS, R5RS and
  IEEE Scheme standards and implements all optional features.  Tail
  calls and first class continuations conform to the Scheme semantics.
  The full numeric tower is implemented, including: arbitrary
  precision integers (bignums), rationals, inexact reals (floating
  point numbers), and complex numbers.  Several extensions to Scheme
  are provided, including: lightweight threads, a foreign-function
  interface (FFI), and extended I/O capabilities (Unicode, networking,
  subprocesses, ...).

* `Portability.` Because the system is mostly written in Scheme and
  the Gambit-C compiler generates portable C code, it is easy to port
  the system as well as programs compiled with it to any platform with
  a decent C or C++ compiler.  There is no reliance on a particular C
  compiler, although the system can take advantage of some `gcc` and
  `clang` specific constructs.  The C code generated is oblivious to
  the endianness and word size of the target environment (32 and 64
  bit architectures are currently supported). There are no external
  library dependencies, and OS API dependencies can be removed so as
  to run directly on the bare metal. The system includes
  high-performance bignum support utilizing sophisticated algorithms,
  implemented in Scheme.

* `Performance.` The compiler includes several powerful program
  transformations such as user procedure inlining, partial-evaluation,
  and lambda-lifting.  With appropriate declarations in the source
  code the executable programs generated by the compiler run roughly
  as fast as equivalent C programs, sometimes faster, sometimes
  slower.  Programs containing no declarations are also optimized
  without compromising the Scheme semantics by speculatively inlining
  predefined procedures (see the [benchmarks
  page](https://gambitscheme.org/wiki/index.php?title=Benchmarks) for
  a comparison with other Scheme implementations and other languages).
  Thanks to an efficient implementation of continuations, the thread
  system is very efficient and can support millions of concurrent
  threads.

* `Reliability.` Stable releases typically have very few bugs.
  Gambit-C has been used to develop large-scale [real-world software
  and
  services](https://gambitscheme.org/wiki/index.php?title=Real-world_software_and_services)
  in academic and commercial settings.

### Source repository

The Gambit repository is hosted on github [here](https://github.com/gambit/gambit).

### Reporting bugs

Please use the [issue tracker on github](https://github.com/gambit/gambit/issues).

### Presentations and research papers on Gambit

* An overview of the Gambit system was presented at the 2010
  International Lisp Conference ("Gambit Scheme: Inside Out"
  [slides](http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~gambit/Gambit-inside-out.pdf)).

* The Gambit-JS version was first explained in a paper at the 2015
  Dynamic Languages Symposium ("Compiling for Multi-language Task
  Migration"
  [paper](http://www-labs.iro.umontreal.ca/~feeley/papers/FeeleyDLS15.pdf)
  and
  [slides](http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~gambit/migrate-dls15-talk.pdf)).

* "Tail Calling Between Code Generated by C and Native Backends"
  [paper](http://www-labs.iro.umontreal.ca/~feeley/papers/HuberdeauFeeleySFPW18.pdf)
  and [slides](http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~gambit/SW2018-talk.pdf)
  from the 2018 Scheme Workshop.

* "An R7RS Compatible Module System for Termite Scheme"
  [paper](http://www-labs.iro.umontreal.ca/~feeley/papers/HamelFeeleyELS20.pdf)
  and
  [slides](https://www.european-lisp-symposium.org/static/2020/hamel-feeley-slides.pdf)
  from the 2020 European Lisp Symposium.

* The presentations from the 2019 Gambit@30 event were recorded and
  the slides and videos are available
  [here](https://github.com/gambit/gambit-at-30).

### Gambit web page

Some useful information can be found on the Gambit web page:

* [How to install a recent release of Gambit using a package manager](https://gambitscheme.org/latest/).

* [The Gambit manual](https://gambitscheme.org/latest/manual/).

* [The Gambit Forensics system that tracks system performance](https://forensics.gambitscheme.org).

* [An online version of Gambit-JS executing in the web browser](https://try.gambitscheme.org).

### License

Gambit is Copyright &copy; 1994-2023 by Marc Feeley.
It is released under a dual LGPL and Apache 2 license. You
can choose whichever license you prefer:

* [LGPL version 2.1 license](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.html)
* [Apache version 2.0 license](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.1.html)
